---
layout: post
title: Who needs a plan?
categories: travel
short: before I left Berlin for a week on a bicycle
published: true
---

> Thus, as I speak here, I may look ahead *or* to the right *or* to the left,
> and in either case the intervening space and air and ether enable me to see
> the faces of a different portion of this audience.  
> &mdash; in *A Pluralistic Universe* by William James

I like the intervening space.

Last May, a combination of latent wanderlust and desire for solitude and
adventure made me spontaneously decide that I would travel to Denmark, and that
I would do so on a bicycle.

After some research, I learned of the *Radfernweg Berlin-Kopenhagen*, a
630&nbsp;km cycling route connecting the German and the Danish capitals. I had
no idea how far I would be able to travel each day, but I outlined a plan that
averaged 60&nbsp;km/day. I still did not set any hard goals on myself. Each day
I would go as far as I could without excessive effort, and no farther.

> A good traveler is one who does not know where he is going to, and a perfect
> traveler does not know where he came from.  
> &mdash; Lin Yutang

I took a week off work. Under my 60&nbsp;km/day estimate, that would mean a
total of 420&nbsp;km out of the full 630 to Copenhagen. The route would take me
from Berlin, across the federal states of Brandenburg and
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, to Rostock in the Baltic coast of Germany, and after a
short ferry crossing some 50 km into the Danish island of Falster. That seemed
good enough.

After a short visit to Falster, I'd take the ferry back to Rostock, and from
there a train back to Berlin. Such a cycle-there-and-train-back plan would be
more flexible than a cycle-there-and-back-again plan for which I would have to
worry about the right turnaround point. It would also allow me to cycle farther
along the route.

As to sleeping arrangements, I didn't make many. Not having established any hard
daily goals, I did not know where I'd be by the end of each day. I decided that
I'd sleep at some hostel or similar in whatever towns I'd end up in, or, if I
could arrange that, at some Couchsurfer's couch.

So with some sort of vague plan in mind, I packed up some clothes, some food and
water for the road, my camera, and my smartphone loaded with offline maps of my
route. My backpack was full but I managed to pack everything I thought I might
need.

And with that much of a plan, I set off around noon of 29 May 2014.

> He travels the fastest who travels alone.  
> &mdash; Rudyard Kipling
